

        
          
        
        

            
      
        Start Printed Page 66262
        Executive Order 13243 of December 18, 2001
        Providing an Order of Succession Within the Department of Housing and Urban Development
        By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, including Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, it is hereby ordered that:
        
          Section 1. Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this Executive Order, the officers named in section 2, in the order listed, shall act as and perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (Secretary) during any period when both the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (Deputy Secretary) have died, resigned, or are otherwise unable to perform the functions and duties of the office of Secretary.
        
          Sec. 2.
           Order of Succession.
        
        (a) General Counsel of the Department of Housing and Urban Development;
        (b) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Housing-Federal Housing Commission;
        (c) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Community, Planning and Development;
        (d) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Public and Indian Housing;
        (e) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Policy Development and Research;
        (f) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity;
        (g) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Congressional and Intergovernmental Relations;
        (h) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Administration; and
        (i) Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in charge of Public Affairs.
        
          Sec. 3.
           Exceptions.
        
        (a) No individual who is serving in an office listed in section 2(a)-(i) in an acting capacity shall act as Secretary pursuant to this Executive Order.

        (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of this Executive Order, the President retains discretion, to the extent permitted by Subchapter III of Chapter 33 of title 5 of the United States Code, to depart from this Executive Order in designating an acting Secretary.Start Printed Page 66263
        
        
          Sec. 4. Executive Order 11274 of March 30, 1996, is hereby revoked.
        B
        THE WHITE HOUSE,
         December 18, 2001.
        
        Filed 12-20-01; 8:45 am]
        
      
    
[FR Doc. 01-31668
Billing code 3195-01-P


      