

Federal Register, Volume 61 Issue 12 (Thursday, January 18, 1996)

[Federal Register Volume 61, Number 12 (Thursday, January 18, 1996)]
[Presidential Documents]
[Page 1209]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]
[FR Doc No: 96-622]



 
 
                         Presidential Documents 
 
 

  Federal Register / Vol. 61, No. 12 / Thursday, January 18, 1996 / 
Presidential Documents   

[[Page 1209]]

                Executive Order 12985 of January 11, 1996

                
Establishing the Armed Forces Service Medal

                By the authority vested in me as President by the 
                Constitution and the laws of the United States of 
                America, including my authority as Commander in Chief 
                of the Armed Forces of the United States, it is hereby 
                ordered as follows:

                Section 1. Establishment. There is hereby established 
                the Armed Forces Service Medal with accompanying 
                ribbons and appurtenances, for award to members of the 
                Armed Forces of the United States who, on or after June 
                1, 1992, in the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: 
                (a) Participate, or have participated, as members of 
                United States military units in a United States 
                military operation in which personnel of any Armed 
                Force participate that is deemed to be significant 
                activity; and

                    (b) Encounter no foreign armed opposition or 
                imminent hostile action.

                Sec. 2. Approval and Award. The medal, with ribbons and 
                appurtenances, shall be of an appropriate design 
                approved by the Secretary of Defense and shall be 
                awarded by the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary 
                of Transportation with respect to the Coast Guard when 
                it is not operating as a service in the Navy, under 
                uniform regulations, as prescribed by the Secretary of 
                Defense. The regulations shall place the Armed Forces 
                Service Medal in an order of precedence immediately 
                before the Humanitarian Service Medal.

                Sec. 3. Criteria. The medal shall be awarded only for 
                operations for which no other United States service 
                medal is approved. For operations in which personnel of 
                only one Military Department or the Coast Guard 
                participate, the medal shall be awarded only if there 
                is no other suitable award available to the department 
                or the Coast Guard. No more than one medal shall be 
                awarded to any one person, but for each succeeding 
                operation justifying such award a suitable device may 
                be awarded to be worn on the medal or ribbon as 
                prescribed by appropriate regulations.

                Sec. 4. Posthumous Provision. The medal may be awarded 
                posthumously and, when so awarded, may be presented to 
                such representative of the deceased as may be deemed 
                appropriate by the Secretary of Defense or the 
                Secretary of Transportation.

                    (Presidential Sig.)

                THE WHITE HOUSE,

                    January 11, 1996.

[FR Doc. 96-622
Filed 1-17-96; 8:45 am]
Billing code 3195-01-P


