

Federal Register, Volume 61 Issue 97 (Friday, May 17, 1996)

[Federal Register Volume 61, Number 97 (Friday, May 17, 1996)]
[Presidential Documents]
[Pages 25131-25133]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]
[FR Doc No: 96-12720]



 
 
                         Presidential Documents 
 
 

  Federal Register / Vol. 61, No. 97 / Friday, May 17, 1996 / 
Presidential Documents  

[[Page 25131]]


                Executive Order 13003 of May 15, 1996

                
Establishing an Emergency Board To Investigate 
                Disputes Between Certain Railroads Represented by the 
                National Carriers' Conference Committee of the National 
                Railway Labor Conference and Their Employees 
                Represented by the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way 
                Employes
                Disputes exist between certain railroads represented by 
                the National Carriers' Conference Committee of the 
                National Railway Labor Conference, including 
                Consolidated Rail Corporation (including the Clearfield 
                Cluster), Burlington Northern Railroad Co., CSX 
                Transportation Inc., Norfolk Southern Railway Co., 
                Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway Co., Union 
                Pacific Railroad, Chicago & North Western Railway Co., 
                Kansas City Southern Railway Co., and their employees 
                represented by the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way 
                Employes. The railroads involved in these disputes are 
                designated on the attached list, which is made a part 
                of this order.

                The disputes have not heretofore been adjusted under 
                the provisions of the Railway Labor Act, as amended (45 
                U.S.C. 151 et seq.) (the ``Act'').

                In the judgment of the National Mediation Board, these 
                disputes threaten substantially to interrupt interstate 
                commerce to a degree that would deprive a section of 
                the country of essential transportation service.

                NOW, THEREFORE, by the authority vested in me as 
                President by the Constitution and the laws of the 
                United States, including section 10 of the Act (45 
                U.S.C. 160), it is hereby ordered as follows:

                Section 1. Establishment of Emergency Board 
                (``Board''). There is established effective May 15, 
                1996, a Board of three members to be appointed by the 
                President to investigate any and all of the disputes 
                raised in mediation. No member shall be pecuniarily or 
                otherwise interested in any organization of railroad 
                employees or any railroad carrier. The Board shall 
                perform its functions subject to the availability of 
                funds.

                Sec. 2. Report. The Board shall report to the President 
                with respect to the dispute within 30 days of its 
                creation.

                Sec. 3. Maintaining Conditions. As provided by section 
                10 of the Act, from the date of the creation of the 
                Board and for 30 days after the Board has made its 
                report to the President, no change, except by agreement 
                of the parties shall be made by the railroads or the 
                employees in the conditions out of which the disputes 
                arose.

                Sec. 4. Records Maintenance. The records and files of 
                the Board are records of the Office of the President 
                and upon the Board's termination shall be maintained in 
                the physical custody of the National Mediation Board.

                Sec. 5. Expiration. The Board shall terminate upon the 
                submission of the report provided for in sections 2 and 
                3 of this order.
                    (Presidential Sig.)

                THE WHITE HOUSE,

                    May 15, 1996.

[[Page 25132]]

                RAILROADS

                Alton & Southern Railroad

                Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway Company

                Bangor and Aroostook Railroad Company

                Belt Railway Company of Chicago

                Burlington Northern Railroad Company

                Camas Prairie Railroad Company

                Chicago and North Western Railway Company

                Consolidated Rail Corporation (including the Clearfield 
                Cluster)

                CSX Transportation, Inc.

                    The Baltimore and Ohio Chicago Terminal Company
                    The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company (former)
                    The Chesapeake and Ohio Railway Company (former) 
                (Northern and Southern Regions)
                    Chicago and Eastern Illinois Railroad Company 
                (former)
                    Clinchfield Railroad (former)
                    Louisville and Nashville Railroad Company (former)
                    Monon Railroad (former)
                    Richmond, Fredericksburg & Potomac Railway Company
                    Seaboard Coast Line Railroad Company (former)
                    Toledo Terminal Railroad Company (former)
                    Western Maryland Railway Company (former)
                    Western Railway of Alabama

                Galveston, Houston and Henderson Railroad

                Houston Belt and Terminal Railway

                The Kansas City Southern Railway Company

                    CP-Kansas City Southern Joint Agency

                Lake Superior & Ishpeming Railroad Company

                Longview, Portland & Northern Railway Company

                Los Angeles Junction Railway

                Manufacturers Railway Company

                Meridian & Bigbee Railroad Company

                Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad

                    Oklahoma, Kansas & Texas Railroad

                Missouri Pacific Railroad

                New Orleans Public Belt Railroad

                Norfolk and Portsmouth Belt Line Railroad Company

                Norfolk Southern Railway Company

                    The Alabama Great Southern Railroad Company
                    Atlantic & East Carolina Railway Company
                    Central of Georgia Railroad Company
                    The Cincinnati, New Orleans and Texas Pacific 
                Railway Company
                    Georgia Southern and Florida Railway Company
                    Interstate Railroad Company
                    Norfolk & Western Railway Company

[[Page 25133]]

                    Tennessee, Alabama and Georgia Railway Company
                    Tennessee Railway Company

                Northeast Illinois Regional Commuter Railroad 
                Corporation

                Northern Indiana Commuter Transportation District

                Peoria and Pekin Union Railway Company

                The Pittsburgh, Chartiers & Youghiogheny Railway 
                Company

                Port Terminal Railroad Association

                Portland Terminal Railroad Company

                Spokane International Railroad

                Terminal Railroad Association of St. Louis

                Union Pacific Railroad

                Utah Railway Company

                Western Pacific Railroad

                Wichita Terminal Association

[FR Doc. 96-12720
Filed 5-16-96; 12:02 pm]
Billing code 3195-01-P


